+++
title = "It's Magix"
author = ["Dominik Schrempf"]
description = "Build, cache, and run scripts with dependencies"
date = 2024-11-22T00:00:00+01:00
keywords = ["Nix", "Haskell", "Bash", "Python", "Compile", "Cache", "Scripts"]
categories = ["Coding"]
type = "post"
draft = true
+++

Long time no see! In this post I would like to present [Magix](https://github.com/dschrempf/magix), a tool to build,
cache, and run possibly compiled scripts with dependencies using the [Nix package
manager](https://nixos.org/).

First, I would like to draw your attention to a [blog post by Brian Hicks](https://bytes.zone/posts/nix-script/), in
which he introduces `nix-script`. In brief, Magix is a slimmed down version of
`nix-script`:

-   Magix is simple and stupid.
-   Magix is a tiny wrapper around `nix-build`.
-   Magix uses Nix derivation templates, and so, is easier to understand,
    modify, and enhance.
-   Magix is heavily tested (only unit tests at the moment, but please drop a pull
    request).

Have a look at the following example:

```haskell
#!/usr/bin/env magix
#!magix haskell
#!haskellPackages text

import Data.Text (pack)
import Data.Text.IO (putStrLn)
import Prelude hiding (putStrLn)

main :: IO ()
main = putStrLn $ pack "Hello, World!"
```

Magix is going to

1.  parse the directives,
2.  assemble a tiny Nix wrapper expression,
3.  use the Nix package manager to build this expression, and
4.  run the derivation result.

The first time doing so, takes around 0.9 seconds on my machine. That sucks.
However, in step 1, Magix also hashes the input script, and saves a link to the
derivation result. That is, if Magix knows a script, the next execution is much
faster: 0.09 seconds. That is one order of magnitude faster!
